                           IMAP client configuration

   Configuring IMAP clients can be tricky for any server. You have to know a
   little bit about how the IMAP server works. Recommended Courier-IMAP
   configuration for popular IMAP client software follows.

Pine (version tested: 4.10)

   Older versions of Pine may require the IMAP_OBSOLETE_CLIENT flag in the
   imapd configuration file. This setting disables the CHILDREN IMAP
   extension, which breaks older versions of Pine. Current version of Pine do
   not appear to have this problem.

   To configure Pine to use Courier-IMAP for the main INBOX, go to Pine's
   main menu, select S)etup, then C)onfigure. Go down to "inbox-path"
   setting, set it as follows:

   {hostname}INBOX

   "hostname" is the name of the server that's running Courier-IMAP. Exit and
   restart Pine.

  Folder configuration

   Pine can also create and use folders with Courier-IMAP, instead of
   creating mailbox files in $HOME/mail. Go to Pine's main menu, select
   S)etup, then choose collectionL)ist.

   Choose A)ddcollection. Pick a name for this folder collection. Enter the
   hostname of the Courier-IMAP server. For "Path", enter INBOX. Do not enter
   anything for "View". Press ^X to save and exit.

   Now, when you select a folder listing from Pine's main menu, instead of a
   folder list, you will see two "folder collections" in a menu. The first
   one will be "Mail - Local folders in mail/". Open that folder collection,
   and you will see your familiar Pine folders (note, you may also see INBOX
   there, that's a bit misleading because your INBOX really comes from
   Courier-IMAP, it's just that Pine always sticks INBOX into the first
   folder collection). The second menu entry will be your Courier-IMAP
   folders. If you open it, you'll see just one folder - "Trash". This folder
   is not really used by Pine, so it can be ignored. You can now create your
   Courier-IMAP folders by pressing A.

  Shared folder access

   If your Maildir INBOX has been previously linked, by maildirmake, with one
   or more sharable maildirs, you can access shared folders by repeating the
   previous procedure, but entering "shared" into the "Path" field, instead
   of "INBOX" (of course, you'll have to pick another name for this shared
   folder collection).

   Unfortunately, Pine lists *ALL* of your sharable folders by default. There
   is, apparently, no individual subscribe/unsubscribe mechanism, by which
   you get to choose which sharable folders you want to be listed.

   For the FAQ: In a shared folder, "expunge" does not remove some deleted
   messages, why?. ANSWER: You can only delete your own messages in a shared
   folder (owners of sharable maildirs can delete anyone's messages, though).
   You may be able to mark the message as deleted, but you won't be able to
   actually remove it.

   Also, when you delete your own messages, others will still see them until
   you expunge.

  Creating folders

   The names of Courier-IMAP folders may not contain periods or slashes.
   Periods are used as hierarchy delimiters - Courier-IMAP and Pine can
   create folders within other folders.

   Choose A)dd folder, then enter "Work.Important". Instead of a new folder
   being created, Pine will display a new entry "Work.". This is a
   subdirectory of folders. Move the cursor and press Enter, and Pine will
   open the contents of "Work", which will contain an empty folder
   "Important". Choose A)dd folder, and create a folder named "Not
   Important". You now have two folders shown, "Important" and "Not
   Important". You can go back to the root folder collection by pressing '<'.

   When saving messages to folders in Pine, you can manually type in the
   complete folder name, "Work.Not Important", or press Ctrl-T, then navigate
   your folder hierarchy.

   You can only delete folders after you've deleted all messages from the
   folder. If you display the folder collection listing, go to the "Work."
   subdirectory and then delete both Important and Not Important folders,
   when you return to the root folder collection, the Work. subdirectory will
   automatically disappear. Subdirectories disappear automatically when all
   folders in the subdirectory are deleted.

  Folders containing both messages and subfolders.

   It's possible to have both a folder named "Work", and a subdirectory named
   "Work." that contains other folders, however Pine doesn't implement it
   very well. You can go to the folder collections list, then add a folder
   named "Work", then add a folder named "Work.Slacking Off".

   Pine will display one entry: "Work[.]". Pressing the '>' key will display
   all subfolders in the Work subdirectory, and pressing Enter will open the
   Work folder.

   There will be a minor problem navigating the folder collection when you're
   saving messages in Pine. When Pine prompts you for a folder to save a
   message, you can bring up the folder collection list by pressing Ctrl-T,
   however there is no way to select the Work folder from the menu. The '>'
   key will not work, and pressing Enter will always display all subfolders
   in the Work subdirectory. To save the message in the Work folder you will
   have to type in its name manually.

  Removing the local mail folder collection

   You may find it cumbersome to have two folder collections in Pine - the
   default folder collection of mailbox files in $HOME/mail and the
   Courier-IMAP folder collection.

   From Pine's main menu, choose S)etup then collectionL)ist. You can simply
   delete your local mail folder collections. Pine will now create its usual
   "postponed-msgs" and "sent-mail" folders in Courier-IMAP, instead of
   creating mailbox files in $HOME/mail.

   Note - you will lose all your messages saved in local mail folders when
   you do that, so make sure to back up any messages you want by copying them
   into a Courier-IMAP folder. Also, even if you remove the local mail folder
   collection, Pine will not remove $HOME/mail, and it will take up space
   until you manually delete it.

   NOTE - if you use SqWebmail, resist the urge to go into Pine setup and
   rename "postponed-msgs" to "Drafts". SqWebmail will have a problem with
   Pine creating and deleting the Drafts folder at will.

Netscape Messenger (version tested: 4.7)

   Go to Edit|Preferences. Click on Mail & Newsgroups, choose "Mail Servers".

   Enter the name of the Courier-IMAP server, for server type choose "IMAP",
   and make sure to enter your login name.

   Click on the "Advanced" tab, and UNCHECK the option "Show only subscribed
   folders". Make sure that "server supports folders that contain subfolders
   and messages" is checked.

   Under "Personal Namespace", enter "INBOX.", and don't forget the trailing
   period. Under "Public (shared)", enter "shared.". You may not actually
   need to do this, if you use a recent version of Messenger (I believe that
   Messenger 4.5 and later support the NAMESPACE server extension which
   automatically configures these values).

   There are several known bugs in Netscape Messenger's IMAP client. See BUGS
   for additional information.

   For the FAQ: Clicking on "Get new messages" results in an error message
   "Error in IMAP command received by server", or nothing happens at all when
   I know there are new messages in a shared folder. ANSWER: this is a known
   bug in Messenger's IMAP client. Complain to Netscape. You can try
   reinstalling Courier-IMAP with the
   --enable-workarounds-for-imap-client-bugs option, to see if it helps.

Microsoft Outlook Express (version tested: 4.72)

   Open the "Tools" menu, choose "Accounts". This is done for you
   automatically the first time you run Outlook Express. If you already use
   Outlook Express, select this option manually.

   Press the "Add" button, select "Mail".

   Enter your personal information - name, E-mail address - when prompted.

   Choose 'IMAP' server type, of course.

   Specify the name of the server that's running Courier-IMAP, in the
   "Incoming Mail Server" field.

   Specify your usual SMTP server for outgoing mail.

   On the next screen, enter your Courier-IMAP logon name and password.

   Finish the rest of the set up by giving a name to this mail account.
   Specify your appropriate connection settings.

   You will receive the following prompt:

     Would you like to download folder list for the IMAP account you've just
     created?

   Click on "NO".

   You will be returned to the "Internet Accounts" dialog. If you are not
   returned to this screen, choose "Accounts" from the "Tools" menu account.

   There will be an entry there for the new IMAP server account that you just
   entered. Click on it, then choose "Properties". Click on "Advanced".

   If you don't need to access any shared folders, enter "INBOX" (without the
   quotes) in the "Root folder path" field, and make sure that "Only show
   subscribed folders" is NOT checked.

   If you need to access shared folders, leave the "Root folder path" field
   blank. If you don't have a lot of shared folders, then leaving "Only show
   subscribed folders" also unchecked would probably be easier. Otherwise,
   after you download your folder list "see below", shared folders will not
   immediately show up. You will have to right-click on the folder list and
   select "Subscribe to all folders". Then, after all shared folders are
   downloaded and shown, you can right-click and select "unsubscribe" in
   order to remove any folders that you are not interested in.

   Save your changes, and go back to the main Outlook Express window. You
   will see a new entry in the left navigation tab for the new IMAP server
   you've just entered.

   Click on the new entry. You will be asked again whether or not you would
   like to download the folder list. This time, answer "Yes".

   If you did not configure access to shared folders, all your folders on the
   Courier-IMAP server will be shown as a single hierarchy. If you enabled
   access to shared folders, there will be two separate folder hierarchies
   shown: "INBOX" - your private folders, and "shared" - all your shared
   folders.

   When shared folder access is enabled, you can only create or delete
   folders by making them subfolders of INBOX. That's your private personal
   folder space. You cannot create any "shared" subfolders, because that has
   to be configured on the server side, either by you logging into your shell
   account, or by the system administrator.

   --------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Pine is a trademark of the University Of Washington

   Netscape Communicator is a trademark of the Netscape Communications
   Corporation

   Outlook Express is a trademark of the Microsoft Corporation

   --------------------------------------------------------------------------
